# Understanding and Predicting Reported Mental Health<br/>STAT  471 Final Project<br/>Emma O'Neil<br/>December 19, 2021

According to the [National Alliance on Mental Illness](https://www.nami.org/mhstats), 1 in 5 U.S. adults experience mental illness each year. Although there is much research on the nature of specific mental disorders and their frequency in the population, there is stull much to be learned about the circumstances in which individuals struggle with mental health challenges. Thus, I decided to look into social and economic variables, measures of the receival of clinical care, health factors, and the availability of mental health facilities offering resources such as diagnostic evaluation and pay assistance by state, moreover, analyzing which factors were most predictive of the number of days in a month a person's mental health was not good in 2019.

My dataset is comprised of data from two sources. The primary dataset is Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) annual survey data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) which includes data about U.S. residents regarding their health-related risk behaviors, chronic health conditions, and use of preventive services. The second dataset is the 2019 National Mental Health Services Survey (N-MHSS) from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Data Archive (SAMHDA), which is an annual survey that collects data on the services and characteristics of all known mental health treatment facilities in the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and the U.S. territories and jurisdictions. N-MHSS is the only source of national and state-level data on the mental health service delivery system reported by both public and private specialty mental health treatment facilities. Our explanatory variables span four main categories: social and economic factors (e.g., race, sex, income), clinical care (e.g., health coverage, length of time since last routine checkup), health behaviors (e.g., number of days in month physical health not good, fruit and vegetable intake), and mental health facility counts offering certain resources by state (e.g., diagnostic evaluation, pay assistance, sliding scale fee). Our primary response variable of interest was the number of days a person reported that his/her mental health was not good in the past month.

Before exploring the data, I split the data into a training dataset and a test dataset, with the test dataset reserved for assessing model performance. I then explored the data to understand the response distribution, observe the response variable across different states, discover its relationship with race and individual healthcare access cost barriers, and assess relationships among variables. I then built seven different cross-validated models: ordinary least squares, ridge regression, lasso regression, elastic net regression, decision tree, random forest, and boosting. Of the regression models, linear regression had the lowest test error and of the tree-based models, the decision tree had the lowest test error (marginally better over the boosting model which had only been trained on a subset of the training data). Linear regression had the overall lowest test error.

I found that there was some consensus among the models in terms of the variables measured to be the most important of the features in predicting the number of days someone's mental health was not good. My models taken together suggest that the variables identifying the number of days someone's physical health was not good, age, employment status, and healthcare limitations due to medical costs are important. This highlighted how physical activity, age, employment status, and economic access barriers were more predictive of the number of bad mental health days in a month a person had than other demographic, health, mental health facility concentration, and clinical care related variables. While the predictive performance of my models were limited and not far better than an intercept-only model, I hope that this analysis, considering the significant relationships between mental health and physical activity, mental health and having a job, and mental health with access to healthcare, can nonetheless support policies aimed at improving mental healthcare access; inform the development of mental health interventions that can take advantage of the relationship of one's mental health with one's physical health and activity; and inspire future analyses that can explore other variables such as local mental health resource abundance, specific adverse life experiences, and perceived stigma.